# Why this course?

I pursued this vocation as a professional theologian primarily based on the conviction that Christians had been neglecting the doctrine of creation in a sustained way for a very long time. I've devoted my whole career to the study, not just of creation theology, but of what sort of reconceptualisation of church, Christian theology and life is called for. I am convinced that the solution to this neglect is not simply to bolt on a few extra classes, or do awareness raising excercises. This is because, when you 'do theology' for such a long time with fundamental pieces missing, what you end up with is not just swiss cheese theology, with a few weird holes that might be easily plugged, but rather with something which is fundamentally changed. It isn't cheese at all. So I've spent the last 15 years working not just on the study of eco-theology, but also trying to build up a broader sense of the kind of whole life and culture rehabilitation that is required to capture a holistic, truly biblical theology. I've worked with Christian activists, leading and conducting ethnographic fieldwork in one of the largest studies to date of Christian eco-congregations. I've brought a Christian voice and presence to secular environmental NGOs and raised questions about how people of faith can better contribute and collaborate in the face of environmental crises. I've provided consultancy to dozens of NGOs, denominations, and government agencies. 

One of the fruits of all this work is this course of study. I have designed the learning to be not just a matter of collecting interesting anecdotes, or enjoying a bit of recreation time with God in green spaces. This course is meant to train up foot soldiers who can mobilise Christian theology and presence to literally save our earth. So, we will start the wheels turning on a major paradigm shift: not just re-reading the first two chapters of Genesis - but engaging with the entire canonical text of the bible with new lenses. Not just studying the doctrine of creation, but re-thinking the whole theological apparatus with the notion that God's good creation matters. You will find some of your study to be spiritually challenging, particularly as we face some of the depths of the crisis our earth is in and the depths of human indifference. With this in mind, we will take a new look at Christian spiritual theology thinking not just about the ways that creation provides us with places for meditation and prayer, but about the kinds of spiritual practices which will make us resilient for the work that we are called to. 

There are big questions awaiting you:
- How can we care for creation in the city? How can we green the theology of the city?
- How does Christian theology bring us to the concept of "crisis"?