---
date: 2025-09-06T09:00:00+01:00
title: "Is Conversion a Christian Concept? A Christian Ethics Response to Autistic Conversion Therapy"
location: "SSCE Conference 2016"
publishDate: 2022-01-01T19:46:37+01:00
address:
  street: "CC/011, Creative Centre, York St John University Campus"
  city: "York"
  region:
  postcode:
  country: "United Kingdom"
summary: ""
url_slides: "talk/file.pptx"
url_video: ""
tags:
  - neurodivergence
---

In this paper I offer some comments on how a neurodivergent liberation theology might speak to ABA therapies. Here's the abstract that I submitted for this paper:

In recent years, dozens of scholars in Christian ethics have written to challenge support for conversion therapy as it has been directed at LGBTQ+ Christians and interrogate the roots of past popular support for this now largely discredited therapeutic practice. In large part, this work has sought to resituate or recalibrate theological anthropologies around concepts of human dignity and reaffirm the centrality of Hippocratic commitment in biomedical ethical reflection. There has also been some important querying around ways that the construction of ‘dysphoria’ as a biomedical concept might be linked to the construction and reification of theological anthropologies which are hostile an account of embodied human diversity. This repudiation has also worked out in practical ways as many large institutions, including some Christian denominations have published formal mea culpa studies and statements including the University of Birmingham which established a formal panel to investigate institutional scholarly support for conversion therapy concluding with a formal apology from the University Vice-Chancellor only a few years ago. For disability justice and neurodiversity advocates, especially those interested in autistic liberation, this has been seen as a welcome but painfully partial development. This is because the development of conversion therapy has from the very start been linked to the conversion of autistic and not just queer people, and for those of us who are autistic continues to be deployed in the context of a multi-billion pound psychological industry in the form of applied behaviour analysis (ABA). It is noteworthy that, in spite of the symmetries in practice, ABA has drawn a much smaller share of public criticism. Stories and testimonies shared by survivors of ABA are similarly harrowing, raising questions about how practitioners should navigate the boundary between exposure therapy and torture, or if even the presence of such a question should press us towards abolition (as recently highlighted in a paper by Abraham and Jessica Graber, 2023). There are many logistical questions for Christian ethicists here. Some of these mirror the questions raised around the forms of conversion therapy that have traumatised generations of queer people. In this paper I explore first-person narratives by autistic persons who have been subjected to ABA and responses by contemporary ABA practitioners attempting to recast their conversion practices as non-violent alternatives to more extreme versions of ABA (such as those which involve the use of electro-shock therapy on young children). My aim here is to explore two things: (1) whether there are any elements of conversion ideology which are unique in its application to autism when compared to gender conversion regimes and (2) whether arguments against ABA abolitionism can be successfully challenged by the claims that more moderate forms of ABA practice offer an ethically safe fallback position. I will explore these two questions as challenges for theological anthropology, particularly in light of calls by postcolonial and queer Christian ethicists to interrogate the very concept of ‘conversion’. As I will suggest in the paper, I am sceptical of plans to rescue the concept of conversion through tactics of moderation, and suspicious that it might irrevocably be an ideological interloper from colonialism. This presses me to provide a very provisional suggestion for the ways that we need to recast theological anthropology in light of a broader account of embodied human diversity which includes neurodivergence.
