Along with being an researcher in ethics, one of the great joys of my work here at the University has been serving as co-chair of our staff neurodiversity network. 

One of the most frequent complaints I hear from colleagues in the network is about how hard it is to explain their experiences (and the underlying causes) of distress in the workplace to colleagues, managers, and even their own families. I'd like to spend a little bit of time exploring the ineffability of neurodivergent distress today. In doing so, I'd like to make a case for digital spaces as a space of emancipation for diverse humans. This in turn presses us to reflect not just on the digital not just as a challenge for wellbeing but also in light of its liberatory potential. 

A few quick points which I won't argue, but can happily unpack in questions:

- disability justice presses us to think of wellbeing in pluralistic ways
- attempts within organisations to assess wellbeing impacts can be difficult to quantify, and thus dismissed as insufficiently "real"
- part of the reason for this is because institutional accounts of wellbeing can struggle to comprehend outlier experiences, especially those unusual naked first-person accounts which lack "clinical" support and cannot be explained in light of a generalized account of “human experience”

I'm particularly interested in the ways that my own defense of the digital clashes with return-to-work mandates and by extension forms an uneasy alliance with some of the various knowledge-worker collectives who have pushed back. A classical example of this is the push from Apple CEO Tim Cook and the the anonymous employee group AppleTogether which pushed back in a series of open letter. Cal Newport captured that protest, and the many others which have followed when he suggested, 

"Those frustrated Apple employees aren’t just arguing about their commutes; they’re at the vanguard of a movement that’s leveraging the disruptions of the pandemic to question so many more of the arbitrary assumptions that have come to define the modern workplace. Why do we follow a factory-style work schedule, or feel forced to perform busyness, or spend more time in meetings talking about projects rather than actually completing them?"

It may be helpful to note the anti-pluralistic (and by extension ablist) assumptions driving Tim Cook and our corporate overlords: A productive workplace is one where we have shared bodily presence in a corporate office that is like a factory, being (a) temporally bound and synchronous & (b) affectively saturated, or fully modulated. There are a variety of views as to whether the built environment and its configuration is more or less irrelevant, but let's assume for our purposes here that bodily presence is experienced and projected in the same ways for all people. There is a half-truth here that deserves recognition, e.g. that embodiment is important.

Phenomenology is a branch of philosophy which emerged at the turn of the 19th century as an attempt to describe the structures of experience as they present themselves to consciousness, without recourse to theory, deduction, or assumptions from other disciplines. AppleTogether letter writers are phenomenollogists inasmuch as they assume that their intuitive perception of their own experience of work and personal configurations of productivity are trustworthy. Phenomenology has tremendous potential to foreground the complexity of lived experience and embodied positionality, opened up particularly by the turn to critical phenomenologies which focus on marginalised lifeworlds of queer, black, and/or disabled people. I'm going to focus my comments here around the atmospheres experienced by autistic lifeworlds.

When it comes to describing the structures of our everyday perceptions, phenenologists starting with Edbumd Huysserl (1859-1938) describe embodiment as consisting of two ways of thinking: using the almost-but-not-quite synonymous German terms korper and leib. The two concepts refer, as Slatman suggests, to "two different ways in which a person’s body can appear (erscheinen)." [@weissmurphy_2020a, p. 203]. Korper is the measurable body, the one that psychologists seek to describe with experiments. Our senses are usually associated with korper, along with other physical aspects of the body, such as muscles, bones, and sensory systems. However, we can account for some perceptions as feelings, which locates them within *leib*, which is, as Slatman suggests, "the body as a subject, a zero-point for perception and action" [@weissmurphy_2020a, p. 203] 

When we speak about wellbeing in the modern workplace, it can sometimes be hard to identify the specific source of distress. Part of the reason for this,  phenomenology would suggest, is because we are overly constrained in describing our perceptions of the world by allegiances to specific artificial or disciplinary ways of thinking. Even will-intended attempts to provide "evidence-based" indicators of negative impacts may tacitly disregard a intuitive awareness. Later phenomenologists introduced the concept of atmospheres as a way of thinking more expansively about our experience of space. In particular Hermann Schmitz uses this idea to challenge buffered understandings of human experience, where my body is a closed system unaffected by ambiance or architecture. Instead, he suggests, we can speak of spaces as having a particular quality which is a subset of our experience of them chronicling the ways subjects are impacted by, or even co-constituted by the objects around us. Atmosphere takes account of the temporal, in speaking of the colonial durée, Alia Al-Saji observes how in the work of Frantz Fanon "racism is not only institutional but, through the weight of its own duration, it becomes atmospheric" (p. 103).

It is also the case that our experiences of wellbeing in specific spaces are as diverse as our embodied perceptions of those places are. The more expansive concept of atmosphere also helps to cover the range of both physical and virtual spaces we inhabit, and the ways that individual humans can experience a diversity in perceptions of the "quality" of those places. It has been widely recognised that digital platforms have a "cozy" atmosphere for neurodivergent people. And - to throw down a gauntlet for the architects here - some of the attributes which make this the case are not replicated in our current physical built environments. The positive contribution of the digital to our wellbeing is, in this sense about opening up new affordances. I'll give a few examples:

Digital space can easily support multiple cognitive styles through multi-modal communication. Some people may feel happy with a quick breezy talk like this one. Others (like me) will find it very uncomfortable to withold queries and clarifications

being able to react with speech or text, and being able to work asynchronously - creating spaces to devolve smaller groups for backchannel conversations which can stop time and allow deep dive while the narrative of an event flows on.

Further to this point, digital spaces can open up new modes of temporal interaction. For people with more sensitive nervous systems, or more flow-oriented forms of cognitiion, asynchronous communication can enable continuity in conversation, allowing time to collect thoughts and develop ideas and share when they feel ready, not on the basis of the demands of atmospheric urgency.

For hypersensory autistic people like me, digital spaces can allow a group to perform a sensory calibration with partners across diverse nervous and sensory systems - attenuating sensory inputs from hyposensory friends who wear noisy fragrances, have loud or demanding speech, microexpressions, or body language, and mitigate noisy office spaces.

When we speak of autistic embodiment, the korper / leib distinction can be helpful. As Murray et all suggest, "has typically been characterized by its external manifestations rather than experienced phenomenology" [@murraymilton_2023a, p. 220]. It may be possible to extend this problematic to other areas, perhaps even the ignorance of experienced phenomenology of workers against external measures of productivity. Autistic lifeworlds are also helpful for this discussion in terms of helping us to pluralise human experience of embodied difference, around temporality and sensory awareness. 

And as I've suggested above, we might want to ennumerate the diversity of human experiences of bodily presence of others, the bringing of ourselves, and the projection of our own presences for others. I'm mindful here of the different kinds of energy that people may bring - some like to work in energetic but short bursts, others require long and slow, some of us will feel overwhelmed by the presence of others if we aren't able to mitigate the torrent of body language, , and the demands that direct presence places upon us in terms of unnatural responses and paces. There are ways to adjust to these realities in the built environment, but one finds few instances of buffers, zones, and levels in actual practice. An understandable reason for this is because they are inefficient, requiring many different kinds of space within a certain proximity for which use may not be easily maximised by managers. 